(Background) According to a popular view of recognition memory, there is more than one way 
to recognize a familiar person or object. Current models have focused on two specific processes. 
To understand these processes, consider what might happen in the mind of an eyewitness to a 
crime who is asked to identify a suspect in a police line-up. The first process is an effortful 
“recollection,” in which something specific to the suspect is recalled, like the fact that he had a 
scar on his jaw or was not wearing a hat. The second process is automatic and results in an 
overall estimate of familiarity. Even if the suspect were not the perpetrator of the crime, the 
suspect could still appear familiar to the witness but maybe not for the right reason.  
Suppose that both the recollection and familiarity processes operate during eye-witness 
identification. Suppose, further, that the witness has seen the suspect committing a crime. If the 
witness recollects something specific about the perpetrator, which occurs with probability r, the 
suspect will be positively identified. On the other hand, If the witness fails to recollect anything 
about the perpetrator, s/he will then rely on feelings of familiarity to identify the suspect. If 
familiarity is high, then the witness will say s/he has seen the suspect at the crime scene, and not 
seen otherwise. Let the probability of high familiarity be f1. Similarly, in the case in which the 
suspect did not commit the crime, if the witness recollects something specific about the suspect 
not being present at the crime scene, which occurs with the same probability r, the suspect will 
be positively identified as having been not involved in the crime. However, if the witness fails to 
recollect anything about the suspect, s/he will then again rely on feelings of familiarity. If 
familiarity is high, then the witness will say that s/he has seen the suspect at the crime scene and 
not seen otherwise.  Let this probability of high familiarity for innocent suspects be f2, which is 
expected to be smaller than f1–the probability of high similarity for those who actually 
committed crimes. 
(Experiment and Data) In order to test the above model of recognition memory, a psychologist 
conducted an experiment. In particular, she was interested in investigating the possible effects of 
aging on memory: it was hypothesized that recall performance would be worse for the old than 
the young. She recruited three groups of participants for the experiment, 25 middle school kids, 
25 college students and finally, 25 seniors of age 65 or older. In the experiment, each of the 75 
participants watched a series of video clips in which someone was committing a minor crime 
such as mugging a passer-by, intermixed with a different set of video clips with people on streets 
but with no crimes being committed. Three weeks later, the participants returned to the 
laboratory and were asked to identify 20 “suspects”, the half of which were taken from the 
previously seen crime scenes and the other half were either unrelated or from the previously seen 
but innocent scenes. All identification trials were conducted randomly and independently.  
According to the aforementioned model and the researcher’s hypothesis, the probabilities of hit 
(i.e., correct identification of guilty suspects) and false alarm (i.e., false identification of innocent 
suspects as perpetrators) can be expressed for each experimental group in terms of the 
corresponding model parameters as 
Age group   Hit   False alarm 
25 Middle school kids  r1 + (1-r1)f1  (1-r1)f2 
25 College students  r2 + (1-r2)f1  (1-r2)f2 
25 Seniors   r3 + (1-r3)f1  (1-r3)f2 
 3 
 
along with predictions of ordinal relationships between the parameters as follows: {r1, r2} > r3 
and f1 > f2.  
The table below summarizes the experimental data collected: 
Age group   Hit   False alarm 
25 Middle school kids  227   34 
25 College students  239   42 
25 Seniors   217   71 
 
In the table each cell shows the number of hit or false alarm responses out of 250 Bernoulli trials. 
(Question) Do the data support the researcher’s hypothesis about the effects of aging on recall 
performance? Answer this question by analyzing the data from a model selection perspective. 
Specifically, evaluate the following five models by computing their AIC and BIC values: 
Model 1:  r1, r2, r3, f1, f2 
Model 2: r1=r2=r3, f1, f2 
Model 3: r1, r2, r3, f1=f2 
Model 4: r1=r2, r3, f1=f2 
Model 5: r1=r2=r3, f1=f2 